hey this is pressure Walker a few years
ago I read a great introduction to
probability titled understanding
probability by Professor Hank x this was
not for school or for work I just read
probability textbooks in my spare time
for fun so anyway I was absolutely
surprised and thrilled when I got an
email from Hank x who said he was a fan
of mind your decisions furthermore he
suggested a couple of problems from his
new book probability a lively
introduction people always email me
asking how to learn about probability so
here are two books I can recommend do
check them out the puzzle in this video
is adapted from probability a lively
introduction your birthday cake has n
burning candles and you need to blow out
all the candles before anyone can eat
cake each time you try to blow out the
candles the number of candles that
remain burning is a random event if the
cake starts with K burning candles then
after your attempt to blow them out it
will end up with a whole number of
burning candles between 0 and K minus 1
and each possibility occurs with equal
chance in other words each time you will
blow out at least one candle and for K
larger than 1 you will blow a random
number of candles between 1 and K what
is the expected number of times you must
blow out the candles until all of the N
candles are blown out and everyone can
eat cake can you figure this problem out
give it a try and when you're ready keep
watching the video for a solution
so one way to solve this problem is by
considering smaller values and setting
up a recursive equation let's write ek
to be the expected number when there are
K burning candles on the cake if the
cake has zero burning candles then we're
done a zero equals zero for a cake with
one burning candle we are sure to blow
it out in one attempt a 1 equals 1 what
about a cake with two burning candles
what is e 2 so after one attempt we have
a couple of possibilities with
probability 1/2 we blow out both candles
so we are done easy Rho equals zero but
with probability 1/2 one candle still
burns and we expect a one which equals
one more attempts to blow out all of the
candles we can combine these into a
simple equation e 2 equals 1 plus 1/2
times the quantity e zero plus e 1 we
can substitute in the values for e 0 and
e 1 and we get e 2 is equal to 3 halves
now I tried working out a 3 and E 4 and
several more values but I wasn't able to
see any particular pattern but when
you're stuck don't give up I thought
about how to solve this recurrence
equation and I eventually found a tip
sometimes you can solve these by
subtracting consecutive terms so that
ended up working out for me and I will
explain that strategy next
so I generalized this recurrence
equation what if a cake has k plus 1
burning candles we will use one attempt
for sure and then we'll be left with K
plus 1 equally likely outcomes the
number of candles still burning will be
a number from 0 to K associated with
additional expected attempts
of a zero e 1 e 2 all the way to e K
respectively depending on the number of
candles still burning we can write this
in one equation e of K plus 1 equals 1
for the one attempt plus it will be the
average of these k plus 1 possible
outcomes so we have 1 over k plus 1
times e 0 plus e 1 plus all the way
going to eat k now we'll multiply both
sides of the equation by k plus 1 so if
k plus 1 times e of k plus 1 and that
will be equal to k plus 1 plus the sum
going from E 0 to e K now to get
consecutive terms we'll consider the
previous term will decrease each index
by 1 to consider a cake with K candles
so on the left hand side this will be K
times e K then we consider this K plus 1
term that'll become K then we consider
the sum from 0 to K that will become the
sum from 0 to K minus 1 so this is the
equation for a birthday cake with K
candles so I'll write this equation out
and now we'll consider these two
equations notice there are a lot of
similar terms in these equations so we
can simplify this by subtracting the
second equation from the first we can
cancel many of these terms on the right
hand side the k's will cancel easier
will cancel
you 1 will cancel all the way going up
to e of K minus 1 when we do the
subtraction we have K plus 1 times e of
K plus 1 minus K times EK and that
equals 1 plus ek now we simplify this
equation and then we solve for the
difference of the two terms and we get
the difference ek plus 1 minus ek is
equal to 1
over the quantity K plus-1 now I
understood what this meant here's the
pattern to get to the next term in the
sequence we add diffraction one over the
next term so to get to the term k plus
one we add 1 over k plus 1 in other
words this is the harmonic series and i
could then write out the explicit form
for the pattern going up to n e of N
equals 1 plus 1/2 plus 1/3 plus 1/4 all
the way to 1 over N as an interesting
tidbit since the sum of the harmonic
series diverges the expected value grows
indefinitely e n goes to infinity as n
goes to infinity did you figure it out
thanks for watching this video please
subscribe to our channel I make videos
on map you can catch me on my blog my
near decisions if you liked this video
you can share about my books which are
listed in the video description and you
can support me on patreon if you have a
math topic or a puzzle you can email me
brush up mind your decisions calm and
you can catch me on social media either
at mind your decisions or at pressure
tal Walker